Hu# qualcomm-snapdragon-x-dev-kit
Notes from testing the Qualcomm Snapdragon X Dev Kit (now discontinued)

### Ordering and shipping
Jeff Geerling has done a good job documenting this side of the process so I'll be brief. It's been a mess. Arrow initially said they had units in stock for next day shipping, they did not and in fact shipping happened 3 1/2 months after ordering. They're a B2B seller so assume if you're a UK customer you have a VAT number. The comms between ordering and shipping were mostly absent, only things like automated dispatch and delivery estimates which at one point said my device would be shipped on the 4th of October and arrive on the 20th of September requiring time travel. When a human wrote to us customers usually my response was "WTF is going on", like when Arrow/Qualcomm apologised for the removal of the HDMI port and gave a 10% discount. I mean, thanks? But also how are you removing product features this late? You already demoed the units at Microsoft Build months earlier. Oh well. Next correspondence was after Jeff received his and roughly went 'we shipped all the units we have, we hope we'll get more soon, soz' at which point my shipping estimate jumped to January 2025. Then my unit shipped a few days later and as far as I can tell I wasn't billed for it, strange. Then another WTF email saying 'Qualcomm is dedicated to quality and this dev kit has fallen short so we're cancelling the product and support for it. No new units will be made. Full refunds for all customers and no need to return hardware if you have it'. On the one hand thanks for the free (well £150 in customs fees) hardware. On the other it would be nice to get a driver update some time and it doesn't sound like we'll get one. There's a label on the bottom of the device saying not approved for resale by the FCC so I don't think I can sell the device on if I wanted to.

### Usage
Putting the previous section aside I have some hardware. How is it? Well, pretty good though not flawless. Plug it in, connect it to a monitor and it just works. It boots significantly faster than the 2023 WoA dev kit and has more USB C ports which I'm always a fan of. The Windows experience feels snappier and part of that will be down to SoC changes, there's no such thing as an efficiency core it seems. They're all performance cores though HWINFO64 thinks they're split into a 4 core and 8 core cluster, I assume the clock speeds are different between the two. The cooling is noisy. When idle the machine is either silent or quiet enough for me not to notice, but any kind of load and the fan spins up to a clearly audible level. The set temperature must be really aggressive, HWINFO64 suggests the CPU isn't going above 50C before the fan kicks in. 

### Gaming
I'm just a regular user so the most intensive thing I do with a PC is normally playing games. How's that going on the dev kit? Well, better and worse. We've got more power to play with so when a game works it works really well. I've experienced less crashing than the 2023 dev kit (less, not 0 crashing). One thing that's missing is OpenGL support so Balatro will not run on this platform, I don't know why it's missing though as it was present on the 2023 kit. [The worksonwoa site even says Balatro works perfectly on a Snapdragon X Elite](https://www.worksonwoa.com/games/balatro/), though as far as I can tell the GPU has never supported OpenGL? I've also had some games crash the system, like The Witcher 3 which I find odd as worksonwoa says that's playable on a Surface Laptop. Cyberpunk 2077 works to at least the same performance level as the Steam Deck I'd say, though that device has a much lower power budget.

- The Witcher 3 - Crashes the whole system, watchdog timer kicks in
- Cyberpunk 2077 -
- Balatro - Will not run, says missing OpenGL support
- Power Wash Simulator - 50-60fps with dips to 40fps. 5120x1440 High preset, 1.0 render scale. GPU maxed out while CPU's at ~10%. Really good performance
- Half Life 2 - 30fps as you exit train station and face tower with Breen's TV, 70-140fps elsewhere. 5120x1440, maxed settings except 4x AA not 8x. GPU maxed out, CPU at ~8%.
- Half Life 2 Episode 2 - 50fps looking at the portal storm, 5120x1440, maxed settings except 4xAA not 8x. GPU maxed out, CPU at ~7%
